feat: trust infra big picture (#23)
webuild-consortium/wp4-trust-group: task2-trust-framework/trust-infrastructure-schema.md

---

## 1. Trust Infrastructure Architecture

### 1.1 Core Components

The trust infrastructure involves the following key components:

- **Member State Registrar**: Manages registration of entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties)
- **Access Certificate Authority**: Issues access certificates to registered entities
- **Provider of Registration Certificates**: Optionally issues registration certificates detailing entitlements
- **Trusted List Provider (MS)**: Publishes Trusted Lists for entities in the Member State
- **European Commission**: Receives notifications, compiles Trusted Lists, and publishes the List of Trusted Lists (LoTL)

### 1.2 Entity Types

The following entities participate in the trust infrastructure:

- **Wallet Providers (WP)**: Provide certified Wallet Solutions
- **PID Providers**: Issue Person Identification Data
- **Attestation Providers**: QEAA Providers, PuB-EAA Providers, EAA Providers
- **Relying Parties (RP)**: Request attributes from Wallet Units
- **Access Certificate Authorities**: Issue access certificates
- **Providers of Registration Certificates**: Issue registration certificates

---

> ## 2. Registration/Onboarding Process

Reviewer: As I see it, this document provides a more general overview. I think that the title "Registration/Onboarding Process" fits well, since it addresses entities in general and not only Wallet Providers. What may be helpful, though, is adding a note in section 2.1 "Registration Flow", to make it clear that the registration process is different for Wallet Providers

4. List of Trusted Lists (LoTL) maintenance

### 3.1 Notification Process

Member States notify the following entities to the European Commission:
- Wallet Providers (with trust anchors for WUA authentication)
- PID Providers (with trust anchors for PID signature verification)
- Attestation Providers (PuB-EAA Providers with conformity assessment reports)
- Access Certificate Authorities (with trust anchors for access certificate verification)
- Providers of Registration Certificates (with trust anchors for registration certificate verification)

### 3.2 Trusted List Compilation

The European Commission:
- Verifies completeness and technical compliance of notified data
- Compiles Trusted Lists per entity type
- Signs/seals Trusted Lists
- Publishes Trusted Lists in machine-readable and human-readable formats

### 3.3 List of Trusted Lists (LoTL)

Per ETSI TS 119 612 clause D.5, the Commission maintains a List of Trusted Lists that:
- Contains pointers to all published Trusted Lists
- Enables cross-border trust establishment
- Provides centralized trusted list distribution
- Supports federation-level service discovery

---

## 4. Key Requirements References

> ### 4.1 Registration Requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 4. Key Requirements References

Below is a list of the main requirements relating to the entity registration and Trusted List publication processes. 

### 4.1 Registration Requirements
```

### 4.2 Trusted List Requirements

| Requirement | Description | Source |
|------------|-------------|--------|
| **GenNot_01** | Member States SHALL notify entities to European Commission | Topic 31 |
| **GenNot_03** | Commission SHALL enable secure notification, verification, and publication | Topic 31 |
| **GenNot_04** | Commission SHALL verify completeness and technical compliance | Topic 31 |
| **WPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Wallet Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **PPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for PID Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **PuBPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for PuB-EAA Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **RPACANot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Access CA information | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Trusted List publication | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_06** | Commission SHALL publish Trusted List locations in OJEU | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_07** | Commission SHALL publish trust anchors in OJEU | Topic 31 |

> ### 4.3 Trust Evaluation Requirements

Reviewer 2: As the focus of this section is on the **Onboarding** (Registration) and **Trusted List Publication** processes, I suggest to move the discussion on Trust Evaluation requirements and related flows in a separate section.

| Requirement | Description | Source |
|------------|-------------|--------|
| **ISSU_19** | PID Providers SHALL accept trust anchors in Wallet Provider Trusted Lists | Topic 31 |
| **ISSU_21** | PID Providers SHALL verify Wallet Provider presence in Trusted List | Topic 31 |
| **ISSU_24** | Wallet Units SHALL authenticate and validate access certificates using Access CA Trusted Lists | Topic 27 |
| **ISSU_24a** | Wallet Units SHALL verify PID Provider registration before PID issuance | Topic 27, Topic 44 |
| **ISSU_34a** | Wallet Units SHALL verify Attestation Provider registration before attestation issuance | Topic 27, Topic 44 |
| **RPA_04** | Wallet Units SHALL accept trust anchors in Relying Party Access CA Trusted Lists | Topic 31 |
| **RPRC_16** | Wallet Units SHALL offer Users possibility to verify Relying Party registration | Topic 44 |
| **RPRC_21** | Wallet Units SHALL verify requested attributes are registered | Topic 44 |

---

## 5. Trust Infrastructure Diagrams

The following Mermaid diagrams illustrate the trust infrastructure architecture and processes.

> ### 5.1 Overall Trust Infrastructure Architecture

Author: done in 8b84e8cbeb8dcae739593972790113a0239d2036

    Note over Entity,RegCertProv: Registration/Onboarding Process

    Entity->>Registrar: 1. Submit Registration Request<br/>(Identification data, Entitlements)
    Note right of Entity: For Providers: Attestation types<br/>For RP: Attributes, Intended use

    Registrar->>Registrar: 2. Approve Entity<br/>(Reg_19, Reg_21, Reg_25)

    Registrar->>Registry: 3. Register Entity<br/>(Reg_01, Reg_03)
    Note right of Registry: Publish registry entry<br/>Reg_03, Reg_04

    Registrar->>AccessCA: 4. Request Access Certificate<br/>(Reg_10)
    Note right of AccessCA: Issue certificate with<br/>SCT (CT_04), Registry reference

    AccessCA->>Entity: 5. Issue Access Certificate<br/>(Reg_10, Reg_12)

    alt Registrar Policy Requires Registration Certificate
        Registrar->>RegCertProv: 6. Request Registration Certificate<br/>(RPRC_09, RPRC_13)
        Note right of RegCertProv: Create certificate with<br/>entitlements (RPRC_15)

        RegCertProv->>Entity: 7. Issue Registration Certificate<br/>(RPRC_02, RPRC_14)
        Note right of Entity: For RP: One per intended use<br/>For Providers: One certificate
    end

    Entity->>Registry: 8. Update Information<br/>(Reg_07, Reg_08)
```

> ### 5.3 Trusted List Publication Process Flow

Reviewer 2: See comment above about who sign and publish the Trusted Lists. Is the Trusted List Provider MS Component or the European Commission?

Author: 8b84e8cbeb8dcae739593972790113a0239d2036 addresses this comment and provides evidencies, according to ARF 2.7.3, about key roles and purpose of registars and EU

the wallet provider are not registered by registars and have obnly one TL provided directly by EC

see the last updates and redo your review to evaluate the consistency and the quality of the information provided

thx @giadas

    end

    %% Registration Flow
    Entities -->|Register| RegStep1
    RegStep1 --> RegStep2
    RegStep2 --> RegStep3
    RegStep3 --> RegStep4

    %% Notification Flow (Separate Process)
    WP -.->|Notify| NotifStep1
    PID -.->|Notify| NotifStep1
    AP -.->|Notify| NotifStep1
    ACA -.->|Notify| NotifStep1
    RegCertProv -.->|Notify| NotifStep1

    NotifStep1 --> NotifStep2
    NotifStep2 --> NotifStep3
    NotifStep3 --> NotifStep4

    NotifStep4 --> TrustedLists

    %% Note: Registration and Notification are separate processes
    RegStep4 -.->|Registry data used for<br/>trust evaluation| TrustedLists

    style Registration fill:#e8f5e9
    style Notification fill:#fff4e1
    style Entities fill:#f3e5f5
    style TrustedLists fill:#e1f5ff
```

---

## 6. Key Distinctions

### 6.1 Registration vs. Trusted List Publication

| Aspect | Registration | Trusted List Publication |
|--------|-------------|---------------------------|
| **Purpose** | Enable entity participation in ecosystem | Establish trust anchors for validation |
| **Managed By** | Member State Registrar | Member State → European Commission |

> | **Scope** | All registered entities (PID/Attestation Providers, Relying Parties) | Selected entities (Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Access CAs) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Scope** | All registered entities (PID/Attestation Providers, Relying Parties) | Selected entities (Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Access CAs, Provider of Registration Certificates) |
```

| **ISSU_34a** | Wallet Units SHALL verify Attestation Provider registration before attestation issuance | Topic 10, Topic 27, Topic 44 |
| **RPA_04** | Wallet Units SHALL accept trust anchors in Relying Party Access CA Trusted Lists | Topic 6 |
| **RPRC_16** | Wallet Units SHALL offer Users possibility to verify Relying Party registration | Topic 44 |
| **RPRC_21** | Wallet Units SHALL verify requested attributes are registered | Topic 44 |

---

## 5. Trust Infrastructure Diagrams

The following Mermaid diagrams illustrate the trust infrastructure architecture and processes.

### 5.1 Overall Trust Infrastructure Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph MS["Member State"]
        Registrar[Registrar<br/>Reg_01, Reg_02]
        AccessCA[Access Certificate Authority<br/>Reg_10, Reg_11]
        RegCertProv[Provider of Registration Certificates<br/>RPRC_01, RPRC_02]
        TLProvider[Trusted List Provider<br/>MS Component]
        Registry[Registry<br/>Reg_03, Reg_04]
    end

    subgraph EC["European Commission"]
        ECNotify[Notification System<br/>GenNot_01, GenNot_02]
        ECVerify[Verification System<br/>GenNot_04]

>         ECCompile[Trusted List Compilation<br/>TLPub_01, TLPub_02]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: why do you suggest to remove this?

# Trust Infrastructure Schema: Onboarding and Trusted Lists

> This document provides a comprehensive schema and graphical representation of the EUDI Wallet trust infrastructure, focusing on two main processes: **Onboarding** (Registration) and **Trusted List Publication**. These processes are separated to align with the Architecture and Reference Framework (ARF).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document outlines the schema and graphical representation of the EUDI Wallet trust infrastructure. It focuses on two primary processes: **Onboarding** (Registration) and **Trusted List Publication**, which are separated to align with the Architecture and Reference Framework (ARF).
```

## Overview

The trust infrastructure consists of two distinct but related processes:

> 1. **Registration/Onboarding**: Entities register with Registrars, providing identification data and entitlements. According to the ARF (Section 3.17), entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties) are registered by a Registrar in the Member State where they reside. The ARF states that "Member States establish and oversee Registrars" and that "the process and terms and conditions for registering will be determined by each Member State." While the ARF consistently refers to "Member State Registrars" and does not explicitly mention sector-specific or European Commission-level Registrars, it does not explicitly rule them out either.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Registration/Onboarding**: Entities register with Registrars, providing identification data and entitlements. Per ARF Section 3.17, entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties) are registered by a Registrar in the Member State where they reside. The ARF states that "Member States establish and oversee Registrars" and that "the process and terms and conditions for registering will be determined by each Member State." While the ARF consistently refers to "Member State Registrars" and does not explicitly mention sector-specific or European Commission-level Registrars, it does not explicitly rule them out either.
```

### Key Reference: Entity Registration and Trusted List Compilation

**Entity Registration:**
- **Register with Registrar**: PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties (per ARF Section 3.17). These entities register with Registrars for Registry inclusion and operational authorization.
- **Notified by Member States to Commission** (per **GenNot_01**): After registration with Registrar, PID Providers are also notified by Member States to the Commission for Trusted List inclusion (per **PPNot_01**, **PPNot_02**, **PPNot_05**). Wallet Providers, Access CAs, and Providers of Registration Certificates are notified by Member States to the Commission (per **WPNot_01**, **WPNot_02**, **RPACANot_01**, **RPACANot_02**); they do not register with Registrars.

**Trusted List Compilation:**
- **Compiled by European Commission** (EU-wide): Wallet Provider TL (**WPNot_04**, **WPNot_05**), PID Provider TL (**PPNot_05**), Access CA TL (**PPNot_06**, **RPACANot_04**), Registration Cert Provider TL (**RPACANot_04**)
- **Compiled by Member State TLP** (per Member State): Attestation Provider TL (PuB-EAA Providers)

> **Submission and Update Process**: For Attestation Providers, successful registration with the Registrar triggers the Member State TLP to compile, sign, and publish Trusted Lists, then submit the TL URL to the European Commission. For Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Access CAs, and Registration Cert Providers, Member States notify these entities to the Commission, and the Commission compiles and publishes their Trusted Lists directly. See [Section 5.3.1](#531-submission-and-update-models-registration-to-trusted-list) for detailed submission and update models.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Submission and Update Process**: For Attestation Providers, successful registration with the Registrar triggers the Member State TLP to compile, sign, and publish Trusted Lists, then submit the TL URL to the European Commission. For other entities (Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Access CAs, and Registration Cert Providers) Member States notify the Commission directly, and the Commission handles the compilation and publication of their Trusted Lists directly. See [Section 5.3.1](#531-submission-and-update-models-registration-to-trusted-list) for detailed submission and update models.
```

## 1. Trust Infrastructure Architecture

### 1.1 Trust Infrastructure Authorities

The trust infrastructure is operated by the following authorities and entities:

> - **Registrar**: Manages registration of entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties). According to the ARF (Section 3.17), entities are registered by a Registrar in the Member State where they reside. The ARF states that "Member States establish and oversee Registrars" and that "the process and terms and conditions for registering will be determined by each Member State." While the ARF consistently refers to Member State-level Registrars, it does not explicitly specify whether Registrars can be sector-specific or established at European Commission level.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Registrar**: Manages  entity registration (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties).  Per ARF Section 3.17, these entities are registered by a Registrar in the Member State where they reside. The ARF also states that "Member States establish and oversee Registrars" and that "the process and terms and conditions for registering will be determined by each Member State." While the ARF consistently refers to Member State-level Registrars, it does not explicitly specify whether Registrars can be sector-specific or established at European Commission level.
```

  - **For QEAA Providers**: Attestation type(s) that the Provider intends to issue to Wallet Units (e.g., diplomas, professional qualifications).
  - **For PuB-EAA Providers**: Attestation type(s) that the Provider intends to issue to Wallet Units (e.g., mDLs, vehicle registration cards).
  - **For non-qualified EAA Providers**: Attestation type(s) that the Provider intends to issue to Wallet Units.
  - **For Relying Parties**: Attributes that the Relying Party intends to request from Wallet Units, and for what purpose (intended use). The Registrar also registers if the Relying Party intends to use the services of an intermediary, and if so, which one.
- **Service supply points**: URLs where services are available (e.g., PID issuance endpoint, attestation issuance endpoint, presentation request endpoint).

#### 2.1.1 Wallet Provider Notification

> **Note**: This section describes the notification process for Wallet Providers. PID Providers follow a different process: they register with Registrars (see [Section 2.1](#21-registration-flow)) and are then also notified by Member States to the Commission for Trusted List inclusion.

> Wallet Providers are notified by Member States to the European Commission (per **GenNot_01**, **WPNot_01**, **WPNot_02**), not registered with Registrars. The process involves:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Wallet Providers are not registered with Registrars; instead they are notified by Member States to the European Commission (per **GenNot_01**, **WPNot_01**, **WPNot_02**). The process involves:
```

   - **Wallet Provider trust anchors**: Public keys and name supporting the authentication of Wallet Unit Attestations (WUA) issued by the Wallet Provider (per **WPNot_02**).

2. **Commission Compilation**: The European Commission compiles, signs/seals, and publishes the EU-wide Wallet Provider Trusted List (per **WPNot_04**, **WPNot_05**).

**Note**: Wallet Providers do not receive access certificates or registration certificates, as they are not registered with Registrars. The Wallet Solution provided by the Wallet Provider must be certified by Conformity Assessment Bodies (CABs) as described in [ARF Chapter 7](https://eudi.dev/2.7.3/architecture-and-reference-framework-main/#7-certification-and-risk-management).

### 2.2 Access Certificate Issuance

After registration, the Access Certificate Authority issues access certificates to registered entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties). These certificates:
- Enable authentication during service interactions.
- Reference the registry for entitlement verification.
- Include Signed Certificate Timestamps (SCT) for Certificate Transparency.

### 2.3 Registration Certificate Issuance (Optional)

> If the Registrar policy requires it, the Provider of Registration Certificates issues registration certificates that:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the Registrar policy requires it, the provider of Registration Certificates issues registration certificates that:
```

The Member State Trusted List Provider (MS TLP) is responsible for (for Attestation Providers only):

1. **Compiling Trusted Lists**: The MS TLP compiles Trusted Lists for Attestation Providers (PuB-EAA Providers with conformity assessment reports).

2. **Signing Trusted Lists**: The MS TLP signs/seals the Trusted Lists using its signing key (for Attestation Providers only).

3. **Publishing Trusted Lists**: The MS TLP publishes the signed Trusted Lists in machine-readable and human-readable formats at a publicly accessible URL (for Attestation Providers only). Per [ETSI TS 119 602 V1.1.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/119600_119699/119602/01.01.01_60/ts_119602v010101p.pdf) (Data model for Lists of Trusted Entities), the format requirements are:

>    - **Commission-compiled Trusted Lists** (Wallet Provider TL - Annex E, PID Provider TL - Annex D, Access CA TL - Annex F, Registration Cert Provider TL - Annex G): Must be published in **JSON format with compact JAdES Baseline B signature** (per ETSI TS 119 182-1).

Reviewer 2: I suggest the removal of this item as here we are describing the TL Publication process performed by a MS TLP, only the requirements in Annex H should be followed.

|------------|-------------|--------|
| **GenNot_01** | Member States SHALL notify entities to European Commission | Topic 31 |
| **GenNot_03** | Commission SHALL enable secure notification, verification, and publication | Topic 31 |
| **GenNot_04** | Commission SHALL verify completeness and technical compliance | Topic 31 |
| **WPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Wallet Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **PPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for PID Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **PuBPNot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for PuB-EAA Provider information | Topic 31 |
| **RPACANot_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Access CA information | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_01** | Commission SHALL establish technical specifications for Trusted List publication | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_06** | Commission SHALL publish Trusted List locations in OJEU | Topic 31 |
| **TLPub_07** | Commission SHALL publish trust anchors in OJEU | Topic 31 |

## 5. Trust Infrastructure Diagrams

The following Mermaid diagrams illustrate the trust infrastructure architecture and processes.

> ### 5.1 Overall Trust Infrastructure Architecture

Reviewer 2: While mentioned in the text, Figure 5.1 is missing the notification process of Access CAs and Providers of Registration Cert by Member State to the Commission (per GenNot_01).

```mermaid

> graph TB

Reviewer 3: in this graph some of the words are not visible. 

See for example the green box the "Registered Entities<br/>(Register with Registrar)" 
A possibile solution, that needs improvement , is provided here 

graph TB
    %% --- SPACER CLASS DEFINITION ---
    classDef spacer fill:none,stroke:none,color:none,width:0px,height:0px;

    subgraph MS["Member State"]
        Registrar[Registrar<br/>Reg_01, Reg_02]
        AccessCA[Access Certificate Authority<br/>Reg_10, Reg_11]
        RegCertProv[Provider of Registration Certificates<br/>RPRC_01, RPRC_02]
        TLProvider[Trusted List Provider<br/>MS Component]
        Registry[Registry<br/>Reg_03, Reg_04]
        
        %% --- FIX FOR WALLET PROVIDER OVERLAP ---
        %% Defined WP here
        WP[Wallet Provider<br/>Notified by MS to Commission<br/>Not registered with Registrar]
        
        %% This invisible link forces WP to sit to the right of Registry,
        %% moving it away from the vertical path of the AccessCA arrows.
        Registry ~~~ WP
    end

    subgraph EC["European Commission"]
        ECNotify[Notification System<br/>GenNot_01, GenNot_02]
        ECVerify[Verification System<br/>GenNot_04]
        LoTLCompile[LoTL Compilation<br/>ETSI TS 119612 D.5]
        LoTL[List of Trusted Lists<br/>Signed/Sealed by EC]
    end

    subgraph Entities["Registered Entities<br/>(Register with Registrar)"]
        %% --- GHOST NODE FIX (Previous solution) ---
        SpacerNode[ ]:::spacer
        PID[PID Provider<br/>Registers with Registrar<br/>Also notified to Commission<br/>PPNot_02]
        AP[Attestation Provider<br/>PuBPNot_02]
        RP[Relying Party<br/>Reg_25]
        
    end

    subgraph TL["Published Trusted Lists"]
        WPTL[Wallet Provider TL<br/>EU-wide, compiled by EC<br/>WPNot_04, WPNot_05]
        PIDTL[PID Provider TL<br/>EU-wide, compiled by EC<br/>PPNot_05]
        APTL[Attestation Provider TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP<br/>PuBPNot_03]
        ACATL[Access CA TL<br/>EU-wide, compiled by EC<br/>PPNot_06, RPACANot_04]
        RegCertTL[Registration Cert Provider TL<br/>EU-wide, compiled by EC<br/>RPACANot_04]
    end

    %% --- Registration Flow ---
    PID -->|Register with identification & entitlements<br/>Reg_01, Reg_19| Registrar
    AP -->|Register with identification & entitlements<br/>Reg_01, Reg_21| Registrar
    RP -->|Register with identification & entitlements<br/>Reg_01, Reg_25| Registrar
    
    %% Connections involving WP
    WP -.->|MS notifies WP to Commission<br/>GenNot_01, WPNot_01, WPNot_02| ECNotify
    
    PID -.->|After registration, MS notifies PID Provider to Commission<br/>GenNot_01, PPNot_01, PPNot_02| ECNotify   
    Registrar -->|Approve & Register<br/>Reg_19, Reg_21| Registry
    Registrar -->|Request Access Cert<br/>Reg_10| AccessCA
    
    %% These are the arrows that were overlapping
    AccessCA -->|Issue Access Certificate<br/>Reg_10, Reg_12| Entities
    Registrar -.->|Optional: Request Reg Cert<br/>RPRC_09, RPRC_13| RegCertProv
    RegCertProv -.->|Issue Registration Certificate<br/>RPRC_02| Entities
    
    %% --- Submission and Update ---
    Registrar -->|Registration Complete<br/>Triggers TLP for Attestation Providers| TLProvider
    Registry -.->|TLP accesses Registry data<br/>Extracts Trust Anchors for Attestation Providers| TLProvider
    
    %% --- Trusted List Publication Flow ---
    TLProvider -->|Compile, Sign & Publish<br/>Attestation Provider TL only<br/>PuBPNot_03| APTL
    TLProvider -->|Submit TL URL<br/>GenNot_01| ECNotify
    ECNotify -->|Commission compiles & publishes<br/>Wallet Provider TL<br/>WPNot_04, WPNot_05| WPTL
    ECNotify -->|Commission compiles & publishes<br/>PID Provider TL<br/>PPNot_05| PIDTL
    ECNotify -->|Commission compiles & publishes<br/>Access CA TL<br/>PPNot_06, RPACANot_04| ACATL
    ECNotify -->|Commission compiles & publishes<br/>Registration Cert Provider TL<br/>RPACANot_04| RegCertTL
    ECNotify -->|Verify TL completeness<br/>GenNot_04| ECVerify
    ECVerify -->|Compile LoTL<br/>ETSI TS 119612 D.5| LoTLCompile
    LoTLCompile -->|Sign & Publish LoTL<br/>TLPub_06| LoTL
    LoTL -->|Contains pointers to| TL

    style MS fill:#e1f5ff
    style EC fill:#fff4e1
    style Entities fill:#e8f5e9
    style TL fill:#f3e5f5

#### Recommendation

**Model A (Automatic Trigger)** is recommended for logical coherence and operational efficiency. The Registrar, upon successful registration, should automatically trigger the TLP to compile, sign, and publish Trusted Lists (for Attestation Providers only). This results in:

- Automatic processing of registered Attestation Providers that require Trusted List inclusion.
- Synchronized Registry and Trusted Lists for Attestation Providers.
- Single point of registration for entities.
- Process managed by the Registrar, with TLP acting as the Trusted List publisher for Attestation Providers.

The TLP's role in this model is to:
- Receive registration completion notifications from Registrar (for Attestation Providers only).
- Extract trust anchors and relevant data from Registry.
- Compile Attestation Provider Trusted Lists according to ETSI TS 119 612 specifications.
- Sign/seal and publish Trusted Lists at publicly accessible URLs (per Member State).
- Submit Trusted List URLs to European Commission.

See [Overview](#overview) for Commission-compiled Trusted Lists process.

### 5.3.2 Trusted List Publication Process Flow (Notification Only)

> This diagram focuses solely on the notification process, as referenced in the original document structure.

Reviewer 2: MS SHALL notify all PID Providers, PuB-EAA Providers, Wallet Providers, Access Certificate Authorities, and Providers of registration certificates to the European Commission (GenNot_01), this interaction is shown only for the Pub-EAA Provider.

Reviewer 3: In my opinion this could be a possibile generalization 

`
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant MS as Member State Entities <br> Trusted List Provider
    participant ECNotify as European Commission<br/>Notification System<br/>GenNot_01
    participant ECVerify as European Commission<br/>Verification System<br/>GenNot_04
    participant ECCompile as European Commission<br/>Compilation System<br/>TLPub_01
    participant LoTL as List of Trusted Lists<br/>ETSI TS 119612 D.5
    participant TL as Published Trusted Lists<br/>TLPub_05
    Note over MS: Note: Entities to be notified are: <br> Entities Registered in Registrar<br/>+<br/> Wallet Providers<br/>+<br/> Access CAs<br/>+<br/> Providers of Registration Certificates
    Note over MS,LoTL: Trusted List Publication Process

    rect rgb(230, 245, 255)
        Note over MS,TL: Phase 1: MS TLP Compiles, Signs & Publishes TL
        alt Entities Registered in Registrar
            MS->>MS: 1a. Compile TL<br/>      
            MS->>TL: 2a. Sign/Seal & Publish  TL<br/>(TLPub_05)
            Note right of TL: Published at MS TLP URL<br/>Machine-readable & human-readable<br/>ETSI TS 119612 format
        else Wallet Providers
            MS->>MS: 1b. Collect Data<br/>(WPNot_02)      
            Note right of TL: Published at MS TLP URL<br/>Machine-readable & human-readable<br/>ETSI TS 119612 format
        end
    end
    rect rgb(255, 244, 225)
        Note over MS,ECNotify: Phase 2: MS Notification to EU 
        alt Entities Registered in Registrar
            MS->>ECNotify: 3. Submit  TL URL to EC<br/>(GenNot_01)
            Note right of MS: Submit URL of published<br/> Trusted List
        else Wallet Providers + Access CAs + Providers of Registration Certificates
            MS->>ECNotify: 3. Submit data (Trust Anchor)<br/>(WPNot_04, RPACANot_02 )
            Note right of MS: Submit Trust Anchor 

        end
        
    end
    rect rgb(255, 230, 230)
        Note over ECVerify,LoTL: Phase 3: EC Compiles Commission TLs, Verifies MS TLs, and Maintains LoTL
        ECCompile->>ECCompile: 4. Commission compiles Wallet Provider TL<br/>(WPNot_04, WPNot_05)
        ECCompile->>ECCompile: 5. Commission compiles PID Provider TL<br/>(PPNot_05)
        ECCompile->>ECCompile: 6. Commission compiles Access CA TL<br/>(PPNot_06, RPACANot_04)
        ECCompile->>ECCompile: 7. Commission compiles Registration Cert Provider TL<br/>(RPACANot_04)
        
        ECNotify->>ECVerify: 8. Verify  TL Completeness & Compliance<br/>(GenNot_04)
        Note right of ECVerify: Technical validation<br/>Schema compliance<br/>Verify TL signatures
        
        ECVerify->>ECCompile: 9. Compile List of Trusted Lists<br/>(ETSI TS 119612 D.5)
        Note right of ECCompile: Create TrustedListPointers<br/>for EC-compiled TLs: WP, PID, Access CA, Reg Cert<br/>Plus MS TLP-compiled TLs:  per MS
        
        ECCompile->>LoTL: 10. Sign/Seal & Publish LoTL<br/>(TLPub_06)
        Note right of LoTL: Published by EC<br/>Contains pointers to EC-compiled TLs<br/>and MS TLP-compiled  TLs
        
        ECCompile->>ECCompile: 11. Publish in OJEU<br/>(TLPub_06, TLPub_07)
        Note right of ECCompile: LoTL location &<br/>trust anchors
    end
```
`

- Authenticate entities during service interactions.
- Reference the registry for entitlement verification.
- Include Signed Certificate Timestamps (SCT) for Certificate Transparency.

### 2.3 Registration Certificate Issuance (Optional)

If the Registrar policy requires it, the provider of Registration Certificates issues registration certificates that:
- Detail the entity's registration status.
- Specify entitlements for the specific entity, including available attestation types from Credential Issuers and attributes requested by Relying Parties.
- Enable Wallet Units to verify entity entitlements.

Registration certificates are issued per:
- **RPRC_09**: For Relying Parties (Registrar MAY decide to issue registration certificates to Relying Parties).
- **RPRC_13**: For Credential Issuers (PID Providers, Attestation Providers) (Registrar MAY decide to issue registration certificates to Providers).

## 3. Trusted List Publication Process

The Trusted List publication process is separate from registration. See [Overview](#overview) for Trusted List compilation responsibilities. The process involves:

> 1. Member State TLPs compile, sign, and publish Trusted Lists for all entities (Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Access CAs, Registration Cert Providers) based on notifications from Member States.

Reviewer 4: Please note that it states that Member State TLPs must publish all lists, which, as I understand you, propose not to do in the pilot for wallets providers, access and registration cert providers.

2. Member State TLPs submit Trusted List URLs to the European Commission.
3. Commission verifies Trusted Lists and maintains the List of Trusted Lists (LoTL) containing pointers to all published Trusted Lists.
4. Commission signs and publishes the LoTL.

### 3.1 Trusted List Publication by Trusted List Provider

> > **Note on Trusted List Provider Organizational Level**: The ARF ([Section 3.5](https://eudi.dev/2.7.3/architecture-and-reference-framework-main/#35-trusted-list-provider)) defines a Trusted List Provider (TLP) as "a body responsible for maintaining, managing, and publishing a Trusted List." Both Member State TLPs and the European Commission act as TLPs with distinct scopes (see [Responsibilities Matrix](#overview)). The ARF does not explicitly specify whether Member State TLPs must be Member State entities, sector-specific bodies, or the European Commission itself. However, the notification requirements (GenNot_01) state that "Member States SHALL notify" entities to the Commission, and [Section 3.5](https://eudi.dev/2.7.3/architecture-and-reference-framework-main/#35-trusted-list-provider) states that "relevant entities must be notified to the Commission by a Member State." This suggests that Member State TLPs operate at Member State level, though the ARF does not explicitly rule out other organizational models. There is also an inconsistency in the ARF itself ([Section 6.3.2](https://eudi.dev/2.7.3/architecture-and-reference-framework-main/#632-pid-provider-or-attestation-provider-registration-and-notification)) where line 2838 states that "A PID Provider or an Attestation Provider is registered by a Trusted List Provider" while line 2851 states that entities "register itself with a Registrar," regarding whether entities are registered by a TLP or by a Registrar.

Reviewer 4: Good points

> The Member State Trusted List Provider (MS TLP) is responsible for (for Attestation Providers only):

Reviewer 4: Could we explicitly state that we make this assumption or simplification for the pilot and will just have a single, Commission level, trusted list for each of these?

In ARF Sections like [PID Provider verifies the authenticity of the Wallet Unit](https://eudi.dev/2.7.3/architecture-and-reference-framework-main/#66231-verifies-the-authenticity-of-the-wallet-unit) it says that PID provider may select which TLP they want to use, which implies that they can even select a list from a MS TLP, which further implies that there may be many TLs and consolidated list at the EU level.

2. **Trusted List Publication**: The European Commission compiles Trusted Lists for Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Access CAs, and Registration Cert Providers. Member State TLPs compile Trusted Lists per Member State for Attestation Providers. See [Overview](#overview) for Trusted List compilation responsibilities.

Both processes are required for the trust ecosystem:
- **Registration**: Defines operational authorization and entitlement management.
- **Trusted Lists**: Contain cryptographic trust anchors for signature and certificate validation.

The separation of these processes aligns with the ARF and enables:
- Independent lifecycle management.
- Different trust models (operational vs. cryptographic).
- Scalable cross-border trust establishment.
- Clear separation of concerns between MS and EU levels.
- Trusted Lists compiled by the European Commission (Wallet Provider, PID Provider, Access CA, Registration Cert Provider) for consistent recognition across all Member States.
- Member State-level Trusted Lists (Attestation Provider) for Member State-specific management.

## 7. Implementation Considerations

### 7.1 Member State Autonomous Trusted Lists

> Member States may publish additional Trusted Lists within their own perimeter for internal or national purposes, beyond the eIDAS Trusted Lists published by the European Commission. These Member State-specific Trusted Lists are not normative or usable by other Member States, as only the eIDAS Trusted Lists published by the European Commission (for Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Access CAs, and Registration Cert Providers) and the Attestation Provider Trusted Lists published by Member State TLPs (which are included in the Commission's List of Trusted Lists) are recognized for cross-border trust establishment in the EUDI Wallet ecosystem.

Author: every member states for their national scope may implement their own TL trying to use the same interoperability data  format

the ARF does not prevent this

## Overview

The trust infrastructure relies on three distinct but complementary processes:

1.  **Registration/Onboarding**: Entities (PID Providers, Attestation Providers, Relying Parties) register with Member State Registrars to define operational authorization and entitlements (ARF Section 3.17).
2.  **Notification**: Member States notify the European Commission of **Wallet Providers**, **Access Certificate Authorities (Access CAs)**, and **Providers of Registration Certificates** for inclusion in the relevant Trusted Lists.
3.  **Trusted List Publication**: Publication of cryptographic trust anchors for validation purposes, based on registration data and Member State notifications.

### Responsibilities Matrix

The following table summarizes the registration requirement and the authority responsible for compiling the Trusted List (TL) for each entity type:

| Entity Type | Registration Process | Trusted List Compilation (EC / MS TLP) | Member State TLP Role |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **PID Provider** | **Register with MS Registrar** | **European Commission** (EU-level TL for PID Providers) | None (no national TL for PID Providers) |

> | **Attestation Provider** | **Register with MS Registrar** | **Member State TLP** (per MS, national TL for Attestation Providers) | Compiles, signs, and publishes national TL; submits TL URL to EC (LoTL) |

Author: ```suggestion
| **Attestation Provider** | **Register with MS Registrar** | **Member State TLP** (per MS, national TL for EAA Providers) | Compiles, signs, and publishes national TL; submits TL URL to EC (LoTL) |
```

| **Reg. Cert. Provider** | *Notification only* (by MS to EC) | **European Commission** (EU-level TL for Reg. Cert. Providers) | Not applicable in pilot (notification from MS to EC only) |

> **Key Distinction**: **Wallet Providers**, **Access CAs**, and **Providers of Registration Certificates** do **not** register with Registrars. They are notified directly by Member States to the European Commission.

## 1. Trust Infrastructure Architecture

### 1.1 Trust Infrastructure Authorities

*   **Registrar**: Established by Member States to manage the registration and operational authorization of **PID Providers**, **Attestation Providers**, and **Relying Parties**.
*   **European Commission**:
    *   Compiles, signs/seals, and publishes Trusted Lists for Wallet Providers, PID Providers, Access CAs, and Registration Cert Providers (per **WPNot_04**, **WPNot_05**, **PPNot_05**, **PPNot_06**, **RPACANot_04**).
    *   Maintains and publishes the **List of Trusted Lists (LoTL)** containing pointers to all published Trusted Lists.

> *   **Member State TLP**: Compiles, signs, and publishes National Trusted Lists specifically for **Attestation Providers** (PuB-EAA, EAA) and submits the TL URL to the Commission.

Author: ```suggestion
*   **Member State TLP**: Compiles, signs, and publishes National Trusted Lists specifically for EAA Providers and submits the TL URL to the Commission.
```

    end

    subgraph Entities["Entities"]
        WP[Wallet Provider]
        PID[PID Provider]
        AP[Attestation Provider]
        RP[Relying Party]
        ACA[Access CA]
        RegCertProv[Registration Cert Provider]
    end

    subgraph TrustedLists["Published Trusted Lists"]
        WPTL[Wallet Provider TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP]
        PIDTL[PID Provider TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP]
        APTL[Attestation Provider TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP]
        ACATL[Access CA TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP]
        RegCertTL[Registration Cert Provider TL<br/>Per MS, compiled by MS TLP]
    end

    %% Registration Flow (PID/Attestation Providers, RP)
    PID -->|Register| RegStep1
    AP -->|Register| RegStep1
    RP -->|Register| RegStep1
    RegStep1 --> RegStep2
    RegStep2 --> RegStep3
    RegStep3 --> RegStep4

    %% Attestation Provider TL Publication Flow
    RegStep4 -->|Registration Complete<br/>Triggers MS TLP| TLPTrigger
    TLPTrigger -->|Access Registry Data<br/>Extract Trust Anchors| TLPCompile
    TLPCompile -->|Compile Attestation Provider TL| TLPPublish
    TLPPublish -->|Sign & Publish at URL| NotifAPTL

>     TLPPublish --> APTL

Author: ```suggestion
    %% EAA Provider TL Publication Flow
    RegStep4 -->|Registration Complete<br/>Triggers MS TLP| TLPTrigger
    TLPTrigger -->|Access Registry Data<br/>Extract Trust Anchors| TLPCompile
    TLPCompile -->|Compile EAA Provider TL| TLPPublish
    TLPPublish -->|Sign & Publish at URL| NotifAPTL
    TLPPublish --> APTL
```
